# `B.08.2` Sorption of Radioactive Elements in Contaminated Soils and Sediments and Urban Structural and Other Materials

## Objective

- Develop a rigorous, standard protocol for sequential extractions of
  radiologically contaminated soils, sediments, and urban structural and
  other materials.

- Apply the standard protocol to produce NIST Standard Reference
  Materials (SRMs) certified for radionuclide fractionation.

## Actions

- [ ] Conduct inter-comparisons using the extraction protocol to evaluate the
reproducibility among laboratories.

- [ ] Initiate the certification of a new line of natural-matrix environmental
SRMs for extraction of radionuclides. 3 – In support of the extraction protocol
results, develop ab initio molecular orbital computations for radionuclides on
mineral surfaces and interior planar positions to evaluate the energetics of
the interactions.

- [ ] Develop surface contaminated urban materials (concrete, metal, glass,
paper, marble, and other materials).

- [ ] Develop an expert consensus draft sequential extraction protocol to
assess radionuclide mobility from urban materials.

- [ ] Optimize the sequential extraction protocol for assessing radionuclide
mobility from urban materials.

- [ ] Develop suite of surface and volumetric radionuclide spiked Standard
Reference Materials.

## Requirements

- [ ] Two NIST full-time employees (FTE) are needed to conduct the Action Items
above; ICP-MS support for stable element analysis, computational power for the
ab initio computations. Estimated cost \$100,000 per year over a 10 year
period.

- [ ] Two full-time employees (FTE) at NIST to coordinate and conduct the
certification of the new line of natural-matrix environmental and urban matrix
SRMs for extraction of radionuclides. Estimated cost \$350,000 per year over a
20 year period.

The study envisioned would consist initially of a relatively small group of
professionals (approximately 4 6 scientists in three laboratories) over a
period of 3 years. In the second stages of the investigation, several expert
personnel and facilities would be brought into the project in an
inter-laboratory comparison to evaluate the efficacy and reproducibility of the
recommended protocol in different laboratories. The third phase would consist
of the certification of benchmark radioactivity reference materials for
community use.

## Background

Extensive areas of soils and sediments have been documented as having
significant radioactive contamination. It is critical to evaluate the sorption
of the radionuclides to soils and sediments to assess the potential of
mobilization through the ecosystem, evaluate the health risk to man, and to
develop cost-effective strategies for environmental remediation. The
“environmental transport and biological availability” of the relevant
contaminating radionuclide species is a critical issue. There is a more
pressing need to remediate sites where the radionuclides may be in more mobile
physico-chemical forms than sites where the contaminants are known to be firmly
fixed in the matrix. Recent studies have shown that the speciation of
contaminating radio-elements plays a very important role in dictating whether a
radionuclide may move into the environment and the food chain. How then does
one measure environmental transport and bioavailability of contaminant
radionuclides? Unfortunately, there is no widely accepted method available for
measurement of this parameter. On the other hand, numerous studies have been
performed that involve use of various chemical extraction procedures for
separating soil samples into several operationally defined fractions. The
interpretation of where an ion appears in such a sequential extraction scheme
is often used as a surrogate for the potential mobility of that radioelement in
the environment and its bioavailability. In other words, one commonly
interprets a species as “mobile” or “labile” if it is present in one of the
early, less harsh, treatments in a typical sequential extraction series. A
“refractory” label is often assigned should the analyzed material respond to
one of the latter, more vigorous, treatments. Although these interpretations
are somewhat qualitative in nature, the information is far more useful than
simply reporting the total concentration of radioactive elements in samples.

> ![](assets/)
>
> **Figure 1**  Soil sampling for radioactive contamination

### Note

In the CIRMS “Second Report on National Needs in Ionizing Radiation
Measurements and Standards,” published in October, 1998, this MPD appeared as
MPD B.5 and the related MPD B.3. A new MPD number has been assigned, MPD B.8,
to avoid confusion with MPD B.5 that had appeared in the first CIRMS “Report on
National Needs in Ionizing Radiation Measurements and Standards,” published in
January, 1995, that covered a different topic, and MPD B.5 in the second
report.
