# `B.10.4` Intercomparison Transfer Standards for Neutron Source Calibrations

## Objective

- Develop and promulgate protocols for the use of thermoluminescent dosimeters
as intercomparison standards that will be effective on a national and
international level.

- Appraise and report on the reliability of other intercomparison transfer
standards and instruments for neutron source calibrations.

## Actions

- [ ] Evaluate and establish protocols for the use of thermoluminescent
dosimeters (TLDs) to be used in intercomparison studies and as transfer
standards.

- [ ] Extend the results of the TLD program to involve non-US laboratories. 3 –
Evaluate neutron survey meters, ion chambers and electronic dosimeters for
their reliability as transfer standards for general measurement of neutron
dosimetry.

- [ ] Optimize the intercomparison and standardization protocols for neutron
dosimetry through participation in international standardization efforts (ISO)
so that they become applicable on a world-wide basis.


## Requirements

- [ ] The neutron calibration program will require one person-year per year
over the next three-year time frame and approximately \$150,000 for equipment
and supplies.

- [ ] Funding must provided for personnel to track and participate
in international standards efforts. It is estimated that this will require
5–10% of an individual’s effort per year plus travel costs \$30,000 per year.

## Background

The calibration of personnel dosimeters and area survey meters used for
radiation protection purposes in neutron fields is difficult. The devices used
for measurements in neutron fields have dose equivalent responses that are
dependent on the neutron energy spectrum and on the scattering environment. In
addition, the reference calibration neutron sources maintained by NIST are not
available for routine calibration or intercomparison measurements. These
measurement services are supplied by secondary calibration laboratories.

In order to ensure the consistency of calibrations performed by secondary
calibration laboratories with NIST standards, ongoing measurement quality
assurance (MQA) interactions between the laboratories and NIST must take place.

The MQA program for photon (X-ray and gamma-ray) radiations has been in place
for many years, and NIST and the secondary laboratories produce consistent
results. The situation for neutrons is more complex. NIST maintains neutron
reference radiations recommended by ISO 8529-1. The physical characteristics of
these sources have been publicly documented. However, the critical elements of
a neutron calibration include more than the source spectrum and intensity. The
calibration depends upon having knowledge of the interaction of the neutron
source with its surrounding material, the phantom (for dosimeters), and the
detector itself. The methods required for neutron calibrations are discussed in
ISO 8529-1, 2 and 3.

An MQA program for neutron dosimetry needs to incorporate methods that will
either incorporate or evaluate the effects of the items mentioned previously.
Each neutron calibration facility is virtually unique, and all variables
affecting the calibration need to be considered in the design of a method for
MQA measurements. Therefore, a method needs to be developed that will permit
evaluation of all of the variables or that has a response to the variables that
is close to that of the devices calibrated.

The original effort on transfer standards was completed and was not successful
at the precision needed. The MPD has been revised to include intercomparisons
with both instruments and passive dosimeters. Currently efforts are underway
for direct intercomparisons using personnel dosimeters. Typical personnel
dosimeters have been irradiated under nearly identical conditions at NIST and
PNNL. The results of this study are presently being evaluated. Follow-on
experiments will determine optimal reader parameters and appropriate
irradiation and readout protocols for use of the Thermoluminescent Dosimeter
(TLD) system as transfer standards in intercomparison measurements and for
proficiency testing of calibration laboratories seeking accreditation by
National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) for dosimetry. When
the irradiation conditions have been established the study needs to be extended
to additional US and foreign laboratories to fully evaluate the technique.
Results will be published and presented at a CIRMS meeting or CIRMS workshop.

Additional efforts will be undertaken to evaluate the use of instruments
including a survey meter as a transfer standard for general calibrations of
neutron survey meters. Another approach that will be further evaluated is the
use of the tissue equivalent ion chamber. Current research efforts on
electronic dosimeters (ED) will result in detector based methods of neutron
dosimetry. The devices under consideration (combinations of diodes, ion
chambers, and multi-cell tissue equivalent proportional counters) will have
energy responses that are different from conventional dosimeters and different
from instruments. Ensuring that the transfer standards are suitable for these
devices will require additional investigations in the next 1-3 year time
period.

Through participation in ISO standards efforts NIST personnel and personnel
from other US secondary laboratories (PNNL) will seek optimization of
intercomparison methods and seek international standardization to ensure
worldwide consistency of neutron dose measurements for radiation workers
throughout the world. NIST and PNNL will be primary participants in these
efforts. Other laboratories and vendors that wish to be involved will need to
perform experimental irradiations, establish a pool of transfer
dosimeters/instruments and develop capability to analyze and tabulate the
results.
