# `B.11.4` Improvements in In-Vivo Radionuclide Metrology

## Objective

- Improve the consistency of measurements for internal radioactivity
depositions in humans resulting from occupational or natural exposure.

- Develop techniques that can detect and measure lower concentrations of
radionuclides in organs and soft body tissues.

## Actions

- [ ] Develop calibration systems and quality assurance protocols for
radionuclide-labeled organ and phantom surrogates.

- [ ] Facilitate comparison of calibrations with standard phantoms to
surrogates in the DOE phantom library and to real animal/human exposures in
order to improve measurement techniques and measurement consistency.

- [ ] Develop 3D tomography and related computational methods for improved
definition of organ/tissue modeling.

- [ ] Evaluate long-term massic activity stability of radionuclides in
synthetic urine and fecal test samples.

- [ ] Develop certified high fired plutonium performance test samples.

- [ ] Extend bioassay accreditation programs, possibly through the HPS
accreditation program, beyond the current DOE RESL program.

## Requirements

- [ ] A cumulative expenditure of approximately \$3million over the next
three-year time frame will be needed to sustain and properly coordinate efforts
at NIST, LLNL, the Bureau of Radiation and Medical Devices (BRMD), RESL and
PNNL on new phantom materials, ANSI and international standards, techniques for
assessing homogeneity and content of phantom inserts, and Monte Carlo
calculations.

- [ ] An investment of 1 FTE to evaluate the long term stability of the
synthetic urine test samples, and develop the reliable production and
certification of refractory plutonium in bioassay test samples.

- [ ] Investigation of extending accreditation efforts to sectors other than
DOE will require a minimum of 20% of a person year of effort.

## Background

Non-invasive in vivo and in-vitro radiobioassay (whole-body and organ counting,
and urine, feces and tissue radio-analysis, respectively) of personnel working
with radionuclides or materials with potential radioactive contamination is a
primary method employed in dosimetry for routine occupational monitoring and
accident assessment.

The variability among “homemade” and de facto reference phantoms can account
for up to an 80% difference among measurement laboratory results \[Kramer, G.
H., Loesch, R. L., and Olsen, P. C. “The Second International In-Vivo
Intercomparison Program for Whole Body Counting Facilities by Canadian and
United States Agencies;” Health Physics 80(3), 214-224 (2001)\]. Measurement
comparability and consistency can be ensured through calibrations based on
national standard realistic human-surrogates (calibration phantoms). In
addition, site-specific (organ specific) quantitative assessment requires new
measurement technology and 3 D tomography. A solution to the problem of
measurement differences is the continued development of technological and
measurement quality assurance bases for quantitative site-specific in vivo
radiobioassay. This is a recommendation of the International Workshop on
Standard Phantoms for In Vivo Radioactivity Measurements \[Health Physics, 61,
893 (1991)\].

Similarly, the variability of in-vitro radiobioassay measurements is largely
due to sampling heterogeneity and non-equilibrium of chemical yield monitors
with the analytes of interest during sample preparation. While sample
heterogeneity problems may be improved by taking larger or more samples,
problems of completely equilibrating the chemical yield monitors with the
analyte in the sample is largely dependent on the chemical speciation of the
analyte. For example, refractory plutonium particles in the lung or in fecal
samples could be underestimated by 15-50 percent if insufficiently aggressive
dissolution methods were used. Even in cases where the analyte is easily
solubilized, precision of analysis of radionuclides in synthetic urine and
fecal test samples is of the order of 10-15 percent (Wu, et.al., BERM
Conference Proceedings). To improve these capabilities, there is a need for the
development of new reference materials and traceable Proficiency Testing
programs to continue to evaluate and improve the measurement community’s
capabilities.