# `C.17.3` Improved Radiation Measurement Infrastructure for Occupational Radiation Protection

## Objective

- Improve the occupational radiation measurement infrastructure
throughdevelopment and implementation of measurement standards and
accreditation programs on a national and an international level.

## Actions

- [ ] Identify and participate in the development of national and international
standards that are needed to support the radiation measurement infrastructure
for the protection of occupational workers, including providing supporting data
such as conversion coefficients.

- [ ] Seek broader national and international acceptance of existing laboratory
accreditation programs, improve upon their inter-comparability and provide
guidance and assistance as needed.

## Requirements

- [ ] Funding to facilitate annual meetings to monitor the progress on the
above.

- [ ] 1/2 person-year per year over a three-year time frame to study the
evolving methodologies and criteria for personnel radiation protection and
accreditation of laboratory protocols.


## Background

The infrastructure that supports radiation measurements for purposes of
occupational radiation protection has two major components: standards and
accreditation programs. Standards for radiation calibration are required to
ensure that calibrations (and interpretation of occupational risk) are
consistent on both a national and an international basis. The standards must
describe the generation and calibration of radiation fields in terms of
standardized quantities and the use of a consistent set of conversion
coefficients to interpret the fields in terms of worker risk. The ongoing
standards development work of the ISO must be encouraged and expanded.
Accreditation programs provide a method of ensuring that calibrations,
dosimeter processing or test measurements are performed in a quality manner
consistent with established standards or criteria, thus providing assurance
that the results are consistent with national needs. In addition, it is
necessary to ensure that the accreditation programs are consistent, cost
effective, and appropriate in terms of national and international needs.
Although the critical elements of a complete measurement quality assurance
(MQA) program are required for accreditation under each of the four existing
secondary laboratory accreditation programs, they do not use the same general
or specific criteria to evaluate candidate laboratories. Questions have been
raised about the comparability (equivalence) of accreditation granted by the
various programs. An obvious major improvement would be the adoption, by all
the programs, of the new standard ISO/IEC 17025 (cancels and replaces ISO/IEC
Guide 25), which establishes general criteria for laboratory performance.
Through meetings and information exchange, CIRMS makes continual progress in
this area with recent incorporation of ISO/IEC Guide 25 into the programs. The
stage must be set to upgrade to ISO/IEC 17025.

A recent innovation is the consideration of total measurement uncertainty as a
basis for dosimetry system approval. Germany has developed pattern tests based
on total system uncertainty that will be used for approval of dosimetry systems
in the future. The HPS is developing a standard for evaluating dosimeter
uncertainty, and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is working
on a standard for evaluating the uncertainty of measurements. These standards
consider a greater range of influence quantities than the NVLAP and DOELAP
standards and provide a rational basis for evaluating dosimetry against
guidance by the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP).
CIRMS efforts will include looking at evaluating total uncertainty as a basis
for evaluation of measurements in radiation protection.

Currently, a national effort is underway to accredit organizations using ISO
Guide 58, “Calibration and Testing Laboratory Accreditation Systems-General
Requirements for Operation and Recognition (Revision of ISO/IEC Guides 38, 54,
and 55)”. CIRMS can assist by providing the technical expertise needed to
achieve an orderly acceptance of these efforts. Operating the accreditation
programs through an organization that is accredited based on internationally
accepted criteria will provide significant benefits: improve acceptance of the
programs by the regulators and the customers (an accreditation certificate has
not been universally recognized as an indicator of program quality), and
provide international acceptance of the accreditation pro-grams. CIRMS acts to
improve the technical basis for the programs, as well as facilitates the
relationship of users, program developers, and NIST in the development and
implementation of accreditation programs and must continue this effort.

CIRMS members need to meet with national/international standards developers to
make sure that needed standards are identified and approved for development.
CIRMS members have been and should continue to be active in the development and
review of conversion coefficients used in ISO standards, as well as in the
development of international standards for beta, photon and neutron reference
radiations. Review of standards has resulted in changes that ensure
compatibility with US practice and US regulations. Information exchanges at
CIRMS annual meetings can identify new standards. Special meetings to address
implementation of standards and accreditation programs will be needed. An ad
hoc working group should be formed through CIRMS to study the pattern
testing/type testing philosophy and make recommendations.
