# `B.13.2` Implementation of Support for Personnel Dosimetry Proficiency Testing per ANSI N13.11

## Objective

- Support the implementation of proficiency testing under criteria developed
for [`ANSI N13.11`](https://global.ihs.com/doc_detail.cfm?&document_name=ANSI%2FHPS%20N13%2E1).

## Actions

- [ ] Address the following, to implement revisions of the `ANSI N13.11` standard:

  - [ ] Methods for dealing with multiple sources of exposure.
  - [ ] Sharing of test data to validate the new test categories in order to shorten the *pilot test phase.*
  - [ ] Ways to deal with the thermal neutron component of exposures.
  - [ ] Methods for dealing with low dose exposures and fading.
  - [ ] Testing at high energies for both neutrons and photons.

## Requirements

- [ ] Periodic meeting must be held to follow through on the details involved
in implementing `ANSI N13.11`. Funding for such meetings should be under $50,000.

- [ ] one person-year of support over the next three year time frame. Such
support can be divided between NIST and the proficiency test laboratories
during the implementation of the new criteria. Subsequently, continuing support
of 0.25 person-year will be needed.

## Background

Proficiency testing of dosimetry systems is required by both the Department of
Energy (DOE) and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) for dosimetry of
record for radiation workers. In the past the criteria and needs for the NRC
and DOE have been different and covered in different standards; American
National Standards Institute `ANSI N13.11` for the NRC and an internal DOE
standard for DOE. The most recent revision of `ANSI N13.11`  incorporates both
agencies’ requirements thus providing a single set of criteria for proficiency
testing in the US for dosimetry systems. The testing requires carefully defined
criteria for sources, geometries, irradiation procedures, conversion
coefficients, etc. in order to provide a fair test of the candidate dosimeters.
It is important that the users, the standards laboratories and the standard
developers exchange information to provide a realistic and equitable basis for
testing. As the proficiency testing evolves it is important to identify needed
studies to improve the technical basis for the program and assist with the
implementation. CIRMS has had information exchanges for the two revisions of
the dosimetry accreditation program (based on revisions to `ANSI N13.11`) that
have occurred in recent years. It is important that such exchanges continue to
occur. Identifying this need in a separate MPD will provide more visibility for
support of the proficiency testing program.
