# `E.01.1` Emergency Radiological Response Metrology Infrastructure

## Objective

- Develop the metrology infrastructure for the national network of radiological
analytical laboratories, under the Integrated Consortium of Laboratory Networks
(ICLN), by improving its capabilities for responding to RDD/IND incidents as
well as accidental releases of radionuclides.

## Actions

- [ ] Promote formulation of a consensus standard within ICLN on acceptance
criteria for consequence management of radiological incidents.

- [ ] Support development of criteria for and implementation of performance
testing exercises to evaluate response capabilities and competence of networks
and their laboratories. 3. Advocate the development and validation testing of
streamlined, rapid radioanalytical screening methods and procedures.

- [ ] Collect existing methods into a readily accessible, easily searchable
radioanalytical emergency procedures manual database (REPMD) to assist networks
and their laboratories in selecting appropriate radiological methodologies
(e.g., fast screening and analytical methods).

- [ ] Query the radioanalytical community for suggestions about new certified
reference materials (radionuclides and matrices) needed for testing the various
laboratory networksâ€™ response to realistic emergency conditions and samples.

- [ ] In the near future, use newly developed certified reference materials to
establish traceability links to NIST by way of routine and emergency
performance testing exercises.

## Requirements

- [ ] Develop consensus performance standard for CM radioanalytical
laboratories: \$600k in the first year, $200k annually for the next 4 years.

- [ ] An appropriate radioanalytical methods database server, software and
computer services for the first year of developing the database: \$500k for two
years.

- [ ] **Total:** \$2.33M for two year, \$1.43M in subsequent years.
  - [ ] Ongoing support by computer services: \$100k annually.
  - [ ] Full-time staff for program administration:\$300k annually.
  - [ ] Traceable performance and readiness testing program: \$630k annually.
  - [ ] Rapid radioanalytical methods development and validation: \$200k annually.

## Background

The Homeland Security Presidential Directive/HSPD-9 on Defense of the United
States Agriculture and Food (30 January 2004) called for the development of
integrated national laboratory networks for measuring and assessing food,
animal, plant and water quality. Both federal and state resources were to be
interconnected and harmonized with standard diagnostic protocols and analytical
procedures.

In June 2005, the EPA, USDA, DOD, DHS, DOC, DHHS, DOI, DOJ and DOS signed a
Memorandum of Agreement for an Integrated Consortium of Laboratory Networks
(ICLN). This established the framework for a multi-agency, national laboratory
capability that focuses a coordinated response to accidental or deliberate
incidents involving chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear agents. The
ICLN consists of five major laboratory networks, covering environmental, air,
food, water, plant, animal and health domains, as well as the federal systems
designated with responsibility for laboratory preparedness and response. With
emphasis on both surveillance and operational readiness, each agency is
mandated to develop the necessary emergency response network that will look
after the safety of responders and population, evaluate the quality of air,
food, water and environment, and contribute to the maintenance of civic order.
With respect to radiological resources, it requires augmentation and upgrading
of existing laboratory facilities for handling non-routine radionuclides and
newly relevant matrices, developing rapid methods, and planning for surge
capabilities.

The specific agencies have critical roles in ensuring the success of the ICLN
in formulating its concerted radiological response effort. A realistic
assessment of the present situation indicates that the different agencies have
progressed unevenly; furthermore, there are very prominent gaps in the
capabilities throughout the ICLN that need to be addressed. A few examples may
be cited here.
