# `C.03.4` Radiation Hardness Testing and Mixed-Field Radiation Effects

## Objective

- Provide radiation hardness testing capabilities for space environments.

## Actions

- [ ] In conjunction with NASA and one of its primary contractors (such as
Boeing), design and specify a new radiation exposure chamber for the evaluation
of materials, including electronics, to simultaneous radiations as will be
encountered in the space environment.

- [ ] In the meantime, promulgate the capabilities of existing facilities
capable of doing radiation hardness testing, such as Naval Surface Warfare
Center, Sandia Laboratory, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Gaerttner
Laboratory, Kent State University NEO Beam.

- [ ] Promote the interaction among the different irradiation facilities to
perform an intercomparison study regarding fluence measurements.

## Requirements

- [ ] An engineering team comprised of NASA engineers and tier one space
contractors will have to be assembled to do a concept design and cost estimate
for a new multi-faceted facility for evaluating materials and electronics to be
used in space.

- [ ] An expenditure below $500,000 should be sufficient to complete a
preliminary design study and cost estimate.

## Background

The overall success of future space missions, including spacecraft designed for
deep space exploration as well as for extended, near-earth orbits, is strongly
predicated on the ability of advanced electronic components utilized in the
fabrication of spacecraft and payload instrumentation and control systems to be
able to operate at full capacity for extended periods of time within the unique
and extremely harsh radiation environment of interplanetary space. Program
managers in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) desire to
qualify high performance technologies for use in future space-based electronic
systems. With a declining industrial base of radiation-tolerant
(radiation-hardened) electronic components, space systems engineers are forced
to turn to commercially-available parts for needed electronics. As such, these
commercially-available devices require careful radiation testing, especially
since their reduced size and operating power increases their vulnerability to
space-borne radiation.

Existing facilities, such as those at the Naval Surface Warfare Center rely
upon antiquated accelerator technology. A new facility with a large enough
chamber to hold up to a cubic meter of materials and components is needed. Such
facility should be able to expose materials concurrently to three types of
space radiation: electron, protons and ultra-violet radiation.