# `D.04.4` Neutron Dosimetry for Reactor Pressure Vessel Surveillance

## Objective

- Sustain NIST traceable neutron dosimetry protocols for the nuclear power
industry.

## Actions

- [ ] Maintain NIST capabilities for neutron dosimetry.

- [ ] Enhance NIST’s interaction with the nuclear power industry, which itself
allocates substantial manpower resources to conform to NRC regulations.

## Requirements

- [ ] With facilities and protocols in place, NIST requires a sustained
commitment of a minimum of one person-year per year over the next three-year
time frame.

## Background

During power operations of light-water-cooled, pressurized water nuclear power
reactors, radiation-induced embrittlement will degrade certain mechanical
properties important to maintaining the structural integrity of the reactor
pressure vessel (RPV). Specifically, fast-neutron ($E$ \> 1 MeV)
radiation-induced embrittlement of the RPV steel could lead to a compromise of
the vessel integrity, under extreme conditions of temperature and pressure,
through a reduction in the steel’s fracture toughness. This so-called
fast-neutron embrittlement is a complex function of many factors including the
neutron fluence, the neutron energy spectrum, and the chemical composition of
the steel. Additional factors may also come into play, such as the neutron
fluence-rate, whose effects have not been fully investigated. Because of the
obvious safety implications brought about by a potential breech in the pressure
vessel’s integrity, the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (US NRC) has issued
requirements designed to help ensure that the structural integrity of the
reactor pressure vessel is preserved. In particular, fracture toughness
requirements for power reactors, for both normal operating conditions and
anticipated operational occurrences, are set forth in Title 10 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 50 (10 CFR 50), “Domestic Licensing of Production and
Utilization Facilities.” To satisfy the codified fracture toughness
requirements, 10 CFR 50 further requires that the operators of all commercial
nuclear power stations institute a neutron dosimetry program that provides
measurement data for material damage correlations as a function of the
fast-neutron fluence. Sustaining such studies is paramount to the US interests
in revitalizing the use of nuclear power.
