# `A.03` Dose Mapping Systems for 3D Conformal Radiation Therapy and Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy

- [x] Completed on March 19, 2014

## Objective

**Establish standards for 3D dosimetry, quality assurance and treatment
verification for conformal radiation therapy.**

## Actions

- [x] Establish a system for gathering data and correlating data between 3D
treatment plans and 3D phantom measurements. (ongoing efforts at MD Anderson)

- [x] Improve 3D phantoms through the use of fiducial markers so that dosimetry
can better correlate with treatment plans.

- [x] Develop user-friendly computer software for handling data generated by
radiation treatment plan (RTP) and 3D dosimetry.

- [x] Establish 3D dosimeter calibration protocols such that the absorbed dose
response varies <2% in inter-laboratory comparisons.

- [x] Develop quality assurance, acceptance testing and commissioning
measurement protocols that lead to patient treatment verification.

- [x] Conduct workshops and seminars to bring together diverse organizations
needed to accomplish the desired goals, including participation from
universities, government agencies, e.g. NIH, FDA, NIST, and ADCLs and interested
private companies.

## Requirements

- [x] A firm commitment to a minimum of 5 person-years, preferably at least 10,
over the next four year time period is required to make substantive progress in
this area. Resource commitments are needed from government agencies and
laboratories, from universities and from private companies working in
collaboration with each other.

## Background

Recent rapid advances of three dimensional (3D) Conformal Radiation Therapy (3D
CRT) and Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) have created an urgent
need for the introduction of high-resolution three-dimensional methods of
dosimetry, quality assurance and treatment verification. Conformal treatment
techniques can deliver escalated doses to the lesion while minimizing the dose
to the surrounding tissues, thereby potentially increasing the so-called
therapeutic ratio, which is a measure of the likelihood that the disease will be
controlled while minimizing radiation-induced complications. Tissue equivalent
gels which either undergo color-body formation or an inter-polymer phase change
have been found to be effective in indicating conformal dose mapping.

### Needs

A single most important objective for new measurement protocols that are needed
should be the development of a reliable system of data correlation between the
3D treatment plan and the 3D phantom measurement. The new system should be
readily accessible to medical physicists in hospitals, as these measurements
would be used on a routine basis to confirm the quality and safety of conformal
radiation therapy equipment, typical treatment protocols and possibly even
individual treatment plans. These new measurement protocols would have to be
standardized and traceable to measurements performed periodically at NIST or at
Accredited Dosimetry Calibration Laboratories (ADCLs).

To meet these needs, standards are needed for phantom design and composition and
for their calibration to national reference sources. Software capable of easily
translating phantom response via instrumental analyses to absorbed dose is
needed. This also involves the development of appropriate measurement protocols
and their correlation with patient treatment results.

Despite having been noted in previous CIRMS “National Needs Reports,” activities
in the areas addressed by this MPD have been limited to a few research and
development projects funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), mostly
through its Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) awards.

> ![](assets/)
>
> **Figure 1** Gel dosimeter