# `A.11` Radionuclides for Imaging

- [x] Completed on `yyyy-mm-dd`.

---

## Objective

- [x] Establish a US based source for radionuclides, such as molybdenum-99,
  which in turn is used to produce technetium-99m, that are essential to certain
  imaging techniques used in the medical community.

## Actions

- [x] The appropriate congressional funding committees and sub-committees need
to be clearly informed of this cyclotron approach to producing isotopes for use
in medical imaging areas. This would be a far more cost-effective approach than
those being presented based on the construction of smaller nuclear reactors.

- [x] Incorporate ideas that are being used in Canada for the use of electron
accelerators for the production of Technicium-99m. Explore the benefits of using
this alternative (which does not require further NRC/FDA regulation) with a
cyclotron alternative.

- [x] Consider technologies to use lower enriched uranium to produce
Technicium-99m.

## Requirements

- [x] Volunteers from the non-Federal employee members of CIRMS to address
congressional staffs.

## Background

The short half-lived (about 6 hours) isotope, technetium-99m, is used in over 20
million medical diagnostic procedures every year. These range from bone scans in
which scintillation counters can depict the image of bone structures through
other body internal uses, such as functioning cardiac and brain imaging.
Technetium-99m (a meta-stable isotope) is derived from molybdenum-99, which, as
noted in the first Policy Consideration above, is now in a critical short
supply. Historically, molybdenum-99 has been produced as a by-product from
certain nuclear reactors, now being shut-down. At the US Department of Energy
conference on "Accelerators for America's Future,‚Äù held in Washington, DC, in
October 2009, it was shown that molybdenum-99 could also be produced using a
variation of existing cyclotron technology. This approach would eliminate the US
presumed need to construct nuclear facilities for the express purpose of
producing molybdenum-99. Such nuclear facilities would be costly and require
years of planning, permitting and environmental impact studies.
