# `A.15.0` Standards for Small Fields in External Beam Therapy

## Objective

**Establish and disseminate standards for Small Fields in External Beam Therapy.**

## Actions

- [ ] Establish and disseminate recommendations for small-field dosimetry with
specific emphasis on the proper use of detectors in small and non-standard
treatment fields.

## Requirements

- [ ] Partnerships between NIST, ADCLâ€™s and the medical community are
essential in this area.

## Background

Radiotherapy (RT) technology is rapidly evolving to narrow the treatment fields
and spare the neighboring critical structures. In addition, very small treatment
fields are becoming more widely utilized due to the advances in RT delivery
devices. Some of these include banks of miniaturized lead leaves called micro
multi-leaf collimators (MLCs). Another example is an adjustable iris for the
CyberKnife delivery system that collimates fields down to 5mm diameter. There
are expectations from most radiation oncology centres that treatment beams will
be available with smaller fields and that the medical physicist will commission
them as accurately as the large fields.

The most common method of external-beam RT involves using a linear accelerator.
The linac typically generates electrons with a range of energies up to 20 MeV,
which are then used to produce x-rays. Stereotactic radiotherapy or radiosurgery
(SRT/SRS) has been used for many years to delivery fields as small as 4mm with
the Co-60 Gamma Knife (GK) system. However when conventional linacs are required
to perform the special task of small field delivery, the delivery mechanisms are
more complex than the relatively straightforward treatments of the GK using
fixed collimators. It should be noted that even though GK treatments have been
in use for decades, the dosimetry of the smallest fields has been uncertain due
to the challenges in measuring the dose in such small fields.

There is a need to accurately measure doses from small fields (<2cm). Dosimeters
have finite volumes and dimensions, which lead to volume averaging effects. The
larger the volume, the higher the effect. Even ion chambers considered to be
micro chambers still occupy a space large enough to perturb the ideal measurement
of the dose to a point on the central axis of the field. Thus, smaller
dosimeters such as diodes, diamond detectors, scintillators, gels, and MOSFETs
have been investigated for their applications in small-field dosimetry, but none
have proven to be perfect.
