# `A.21.0` Standardizing Metrics and Methods for Weight Bearing 3D Imaging Devices in Orthopedic Applications

## Background

Currently radiologists and orthopedic doctors rely on non-weight bearing imaging
techniques to diagnose biomechanical conditions associated with the various
weight bearing joints such as the hips knees and ankles. In most cases the
current techniques are not able to reveal the cause creating the orthopedic
condition and therefore both diagnosis and treatments are mostly based on
assumptions and qualitative approaches. For example a person with a given foot
deformity (e.g. a collapsed arch) as revealed by a 2D radiographic image may be
prescribed a custom built orthotic or a brace to correct the deformity. However
other than a visual qualitative inspection, doctors have no tools to evaluate if
the correction made by the orthotic in this case is adequate or not for
mitigating the foot condition. At best, the current system relies on a trial and
error approach that in most cases do not resolve the condition at hand.

Current imaging tools include anything from standard two dimensional (2D)
radiographic images using x-rays up to non-weight bearing 3D MRI or CT static
images. None of these techniques however are able to reveal in real time the
loading effect that the body has on the joints of the lower body. In the recent
years a number of static weight bearing 3D imaging technologies have made their
way into the market place which include: 3D standing CT imaging units as well as
3D standing MRI units. These latest devices allow to image the lower body parts
in a standing position. In this way the effect of the body load on the ankle
joint, knee joint and hip joint can be observed. Although these techniques are
becoming available, they are not being used by podiatrists and orthopedic
doctors for the evaluation in real time of orthotics and braces due to a lack of
standard metrics available for this purpose from the manufacturer of these
devices.

There is also the need to extend these efforts to being able to image in real
time dynamically a patient while walking on a treadmill to be able to capture
the entire biomechanical function of the joints. In this way one can for example
observe if under motion certain joints are compromised during several gait
cycles as opposed to what is revealed in a single time event captured by a
static 3D image.

The current need aims to review current technologies to develop a weight bearing
dynamic 3D imaging technique. Some efforts have been initiated in this direction
using fluoroscopy and MRI but they are still in its infancy.

### Summary of discussions

*How can we improve the current practice?*

One of the goals during this session was to get input form audience participants
on the need for developing a 3D real-time imaging tool for evaluating orthotics
inside shoes with the patient in a weight bearing configuration (standing). So
once the orthotic has been made (by a professional that delivers the orthotic to
the patient) a 3D image of the patient can be taken in the weight-bearing
position, with the patient standing in his/her shoes with the new orthotic
installed in the shoe. This type of analysis could be used to evaluate if the
orthotic does what it is meant to do. The 3D weight bearing images can provide
information such as specify bone alignment issues using the new orthotics, if
the new orthotic is providing the expected amount of correction without
compromising other foot anatomical issues, if the spacing between the major foot
joints are affected by the new orthotic/ shoe combination, etc… This type of
information can provide real-time feedback to the professional to do an
immediate adjustment to the orthotic or decide to use a different shoe with this
newly made orthotic.

This type of assessment cannot be done visually as it is currently done by
watching the patient walk with the new orthotics inside the shoe. The current
approach is based on a rough guess and simplistic approach by observing if the
patient supinates or pronates or if she/ he looks “roughly” neutral with the new
orthotic. This misses a lot of information regarding the foot biomechanics which
can only be addressed with a 3D imaging technique that allows visualizing the
bones and joints in the feet. Implementing the use of a 3D imaging tool to
evaluate an orthotic that has been custom made, could prevent sending patients
home to “try the orthotic out” as it is currently done in most cases risking
further issues developing as a result of missing the effects that the new
orthotic are causing to the foot. This same concept can be extended to the use
of braces.

Professionals that may be interested in this are those that are making and
providing orthotics to patients, for example, orthopedic doctors, podiatrists,
pedorthists, and selected physical therapists that focus on making orthotics to
address misalignment issues. Another potential application that was discussed is
the need for using such type of imaging tools to monitor a foot alignment issue
over the years for a given patient by determining effective and adequate markers
or metrics from and/or for these images.

### CIRMS session

The afternoon session on Tuesday March 28, 2017 included the following
presentations on this topic. Below are the titles and names of the speakers. The
presentations can be found on the CIRMS website.

- **Ronnie Minniti, Ph.D., NIST**

    [Introduction to the session: The need for developing 3D imaging tools for
evaluating orthotics. How can we improve the current practice?](http://cirms.org/pdf/cirms2017/MWG-Session-III-Minniti-Fulkerson-Culberson-20170413.pdf)

- **Kevin Wilson, Ph.D., Hologic**

    Low dose, mini C-arm fluoroscopy for hand and foot applications

- **Stuti Singh, Ph.D., Curvebeam**

    [Why Cone Beam CT can make 3D the Standard of Care in Extremity Imaging.](http://cirms.org/pdf/cirms2017/MWG-Session-III-Stuti-Singh-Rev-20170404.pdf)

- **Regina Fulkerson, Ph. D., RKF Consultants**

    [EQINA, A quick overview of a weight bearing 3D imaging system](http://cirms.org/pdf/cirms2017/MWG-Session-III-Fulkerson-Regina-Rev-20170404.pdf)


