# Medical applications

The CIRMS Medical Applications subcommittee deals with diagnostic and
therapeutic uses of ionizing radiation, whether isotope or accelerator sourced
radiation. New topics of interest involve the growing use of proton beam therapy
for more targeted cancer treatment and a need for enhanced dosimetry systems to
quantify exposure levels in computerized tomography scans (CT scans). An
introduction to the overall areas of interest in the medical area in the use of
ionizing radiation can be found in ([Appendix D](Appendix_D "wikilink")). This
was taken from the fourth “Needs Report” of December 2004. More complete details
on all of the MPDs generated by the CIRMS Medical Applications subcommittee can
be found in PDF form in prior “Needs Reports” which are accessible on the CIRMS
web site: www.cirms.org [^cirms]

[^cirms]: https://www.cirms.org

CIRMS has been very effective in the Medical Applications area by drawing
together professionals from the academic and medical communities, from the US
FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), and by involvement of
the National Institutes of Health, in particular the National Cancer Institute,
and of inter-agency groups such as the Biomedical Advanced Research and
Development Authority (BARDA). One of CIRMS early success stories (MPD A.1.0 -
[National Air-Kerma Standards for
Mammography](National_Air-Kerma_Standards_for_Mammography "wikilink")) was the
organization’s ability to pull together of various agencies to co-fund a needed
radiation target facility at NIST so that air-kerma measurements for mammography
equipment could be calibrated.

NIST, through the guidance of the CIRMS Medical Applications subcommittee, has
also established radioactivity standards for nuclear medicine (MPD A.2.3) and
for determining the absorbed dose-to-water for photon external beam radiation
therapy (MPD A.4.1 - [Absorbed-Dose-to-Water Standards for Photon External Beam
Radiation
Therapy](Absorbed-Dose-to-Water_Standards_for_Photon_External_Beam_Radiation_Therapy
"wikilink")). National standards for the air-kerma measurements of diagnostic
X-ray beams (MPD A.5.0 - [Air Kerma National Standards for Diagnostic X-ray
Beams](Air_Kerma_National_Standards_for_Diagnostic_X-ray_Beams "wikilink")) and
for the air kerma strength of photons emitted by brachytherapy sources (MPD
A.6.0 - [National Air Kerma Strength Standards for Photon Brachytherapy
Sources](National_Air_Kerma_Strength_Standards_for_Photon_Brachytherapy_Sources
"wikilink")) have also been established. NIST has obtained equipment, such as a
medical linear accelerator, to facilitate these activities. Below is a list of
the completed Measurement Program Descriptions prepared by the CIRMS Medical
Applications subcommittee. One or two page descriptions of the active MPDs
follow. These present the objectives, some background information and needs in
each active area.

## Measurement Program Descriptions (MPDs)

### High Priority

- [ ] `A.19.0` [Standardization in Radiobiology](A.19.0-standards-radiobiology.md)

- [ ] `A.09.0` [Dosimetry for Proton Beam Therapy](A.09.0-dosimetry-protons.md)

- [ ] `A.15.0` [Standards for Small Fields in External Beam Therapy](A.15.0-standards-small-fields.md)

### Medium Priority

- [ ] `A.08.1` [Liquid Based and Micro-Brachytherapy Sources](A.08.1-brachytherapy-sources.md)

- [ ] `A.13.0` [Enhanced Dosimetry Systems for CT Scans](A.13.0-dosimetry-ct.md)

- [ ] `A.14.0` [Cone-Beam CT Dosimetry in Radiation Therapy](A.14.0-dosimetry-cbct.md) - maybe this can be combined into A.13.0

- [ ] `A.16.0` [Absorbed Dose to Water Standards for Megavoltage Therapy Beams](A.16.0-standards-megavoltage-dose.md) - (Modify for dissemination)

- [ ] `A.17.0` [3D Dosimeters for Non-Standard External Beam Therapy Dosimetry](A.17.0-dosimetry-therapy-non-standard.md) - Larry suggested adding Presage and more description

- [ ] `A.18.0` [Air Kerma Standards for Ir-192 and Electronic Brachytherapy Sources](A.18.0-standards-dose-brachytherapy.md) - (Updating)

- [ ] `A.20.0` [Absorbed Dose to Water Standards for Low-Energy X-ray Beams](A.20.0-standards-dose-xrays.md) - (Updating)

### MPDs in progress and proposed

- [ ] `A.21.0` [Standardizing Metrics and Methods for Weight Bearing 3D Imaging Devices in Orthopedic Applications](A.21.0-standards-3d-orthopedic.md)

- [ ] `A.22.0` [Dosimetry Measurement Protocol for Cone Beam CT Used in Weight Bearing 3D Imaging Devices](A.22.0-dosimetry-cbct-3d.md) - (Updating)

- [ ] `A.23.0` [Quantitative Imaging](A.23.0-imaging-quantitative.md) - (Updating)

- [ ] `A.24.0` [Calorimetry](A.24.0-calorimetry.md) - (Updating)

- [ ] `A.25.0` [Targeted Radionuclide Therapy Dosimetry](A.25.0-dosimetry-trt.md)

---
### Completed MPDs

- [x] `A.01.0` [National Air-Kerma Standards for Mammography](A.01.0-standards-mammography.md)

- [x] `A.02.3` [Radioactivity Standards and Techniques for Nuclear Medicine](A.02.3-standards-nuclear-medicine.md)

- [x] `A.03.4` [Dose Mapping Systems for 3D Conformal Radiation Therapy and Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy](A.03.4-mapping-dose-3d-crt-imrt.md)

- [x] `A.04.1` [Absorbed-Dose-to-Water Standards for Photon External Beam Radiation Therapy](A.04.1-standards-photons.md)

- [x] `A.05.0` [Air Kerma National Standards for Diagnostic X-ray Beams](A.05.0-standards-kerma-xrays.md)

- [x] `A.06.0` [National Air Kerma Strength Standards for Photon Brachytherapy Sources](A.06.0-standards-kerma-brachytherapy.md)

- [x] `A.07.3` [Absorbed Dose Standards for Brachytherapy Sources](A.07.3-standards-dose-brachytherapy.md)

- [x] `A.10.0` [External Beam Therapy](A.10.0-external-beam-therapy.md)

- [x] `A.11.0` [Radionuclides for Imaging](A.11.0-radionuclide-imaging.md)
