# `F.01.1` Improvements to Computational Methods for Radiation Dosimetry

## Objective

- [ ] Modify existing codes so that they are useable on present day computer
operating systems.

- [ ] Provide better end-user access to existing computational codes.

## Actions

- [ ] Provide adequate computational resources for NIST to translate the most
widely use simulation codes into present day computer operating systems.

- [ ] Since the use of these codes involves a broad base of industry, the
medical community, academia and government, the custody and management of these
codes should transferred to NIST, where, in fact, some codes originated. NIST,
through its Measurement Services, is properly structured to provide fast and
competent user response.

## Requirements

- [ ] In order to translate the major simulation codes into access via present
day computer operating systems, maintain current competency, a minimum of two
person-years is required.

- [ ] The transfer of the custody of existing codes from the Department of
Energy to the Department of Commerce will require members of the concerned user
community to directly address Congress on this issue.

## Background

Computations have increasingly become a vital part in the chain of steps that
relate measurement to dose or kerma. Dosimetric calculations are rooted in
comprehensive evaluations of data that describe the basic physical interactions
of radiation with matter. These evaluations are then utilized by computer codes
that simulate the macroscopic measurement system under consideration, modeling
the system in all necessary detail. These computer codes can be deterministic,
but more often employ the Monte Carlo technique of particle transport. In
addition to their vital role in the standards and measurement process, such
codes find increasing use in radiation protection, medical, industrial and
security applications involving dosimetry.

Some existing codes still require users to enter data in older computer
languages, such as Fortran. Unlike present day computer operating systems, such
as the widely used Windows platform, these older codes are less tolerant of
errors in data entry and often generate an abundance of data, much of which is
not germane to the specific circumstances being modeled. Often times data
output has to be transcribed into another program in order to have graphics
that clearly illustrate the output of the probability code. The RT-Office code,
for example, has been developed in Eastern Europe which functions on a Windows
platform, maintains a database of properties of commonly used materials, and
generates easily understood graphics directly.

Within the US, access to codes is inhibited by a complex arrangement with the
Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Royalty fees for alleged
maintenance of these codes are charged on a single-user basis. Many of these
codes have been developed by taxpayer funded efforts, such as those developed
at NIST. It was the opinion of an Industry Working Group at the DOE’s 2009
conference on “Accelerators for America’s Future,” that such intellectual
property developed at public expense should be widely available to the public
at minimal service costs. In the computational area, this would facilitate the
use of these codes in the teaching environment and broaden the end-user use of
mathematical simulation. This would bring the US into line with the practice
more common in the European Union where laboratories make codes available upon
request. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has recently published a
booklet on the Use of Mathematical Modeling in Electron Beam Processing: A
Guidebook and when purchased in hard copy (42 Euros) includes a disk with the
commonly used codes on it.

With such a diversity of sources for physical data and for simulation codes,
there is a wide variety of applications that make critical use of these
methods. In recent years, modeling was useful in establishing depth-dose
profiles for the US Postal Service as it adopted radiation treatment to
decontaminate mail from potential biological hazards, such as anthrax (see
Appendix H). Simulations have also been used to study of the possible treatment
of high-risk passenger luggage in order to mitigate biological agents and
pests. In the radiation therapy field, NIST participated in a study of the
dosimetry of beta-emitting brachytherapy sources comparing code results with
calibration measurements. The medical community is also finding uses for these
codes as exemplified in the development of three dimensional (3D) dosimetry
techniques (see MPD A.3.4).

There is a vital effort in using simulations in standards, homeland-security,
industrial, radiation-protection and medical applications depends on the health
of the underlying code-development efforts. These codes, however, must be in a
user friendly computer platform and readily available to the end-user
community.
